README.md, before:

# Balthasar
A Python package for generating and manipulating mutually unbiased bases. Balthasar is currently under development and is as a result may not be fully functional. If you find any bugs, don't hesitate to contact me at odimatte@uwaterloo.ca.

## Dependencies

- [PyniteFields](https://github.com/glassnotes/PyniteFields)
- numpy

===================================================

## Installation
In the main directory of the program, you can install Balthasar into your version of Python 3 using the following command:

```
python3 setup.py install
```

## Usage

### MUBs

To generate a set of MUBs in dimension _p_<sup>_n_</sup>, you must simply provide a finite field in this dimension:
```
from pynitefields import *
from balthasar import *

f = GaloisField(2, 3, [1, 1, 0, 1])  # Finite field of order 8
f.to_sdb([3, 5, 6])
dim8_mubs = MUBs(f)
```

It is best to use a self-dual, or almost self-dual basis to construct your MUB table. Using the
polynomial basis is not inherently a problem, but the program will produce a warning if you do so.


The created table of MUB operators can be viewed using
```
dim8_mubs.print()
```


### Curves
Balthasar contains a separate class Curve for manipulating curves over the finite field. 
A curve _b_(_a_) = _c_<sub>0</sub> + _c_<sub>1</sub> _a_ + ... + _c_<sub>_k_</sub> _a_<sup>k</sup>
where the _c_<sub>i</sub> are elements of the finite field is turned into a Curve object using a list
of the form [_c_<sub>0</sub>, _c_<sub>1</sub>, ..., _c_<sub>_k_</sub>] as in the following example:
```
f = GaloisField(2, 2, [1, 1, 1])
c = Curve([0, f[1], f[3], f[2]], f)
c.print() # Will print the curve in polynomial form
c.print(True) # Will print the points in the curve as tuples (repr as powers of the primitive element)
```
It is necessary to specify the field because we can have curves which simply contain constant coefficients:
```
f = GaloisField(5)
c = Curve([0, 1, 3], f) # [0, 1, 3] could be a curve in many different fields
```

### Striations
Striations are the partitions of the affine plane into groups of parallel lines. They are used to
build Latin squares and MUBs, and also to compute the point operators in discrete phase space for
the Wigner function. The set of striations can be generated using the code snippet below; the first
element of the striation list is the rays, or the lines which pass through the origin.
```
f = GaloisField(2, 2, [1, 1, 1])
s = Striations(f)
s[0] # Rays
```

### Latin squares

To generate a Latin square, one must simply pass it a curve over some finite field.
```
f = GaloisField(7)
c = Curve([0, f[1]], f)
l = LatinSquare(c)
l.print() # Prints the Latin square of order 7
```

### Wigner functions

One of the main purpose for writing Balthasar was to compute the Wigner functions in discrete phases space. 
A Wigner function can be generated using a table of MUBs expressed in the self-dual basis. A Wigner function
can be computed from either a state vector or a density matrix.
```
f = GaloisField(2, 2, [1, 1, 1])
f.to_sdb([1, 2])

dim4_mubs = MUBs(f)

my_wf = WignerFunction(dim4_mubs)

# Compute the wf of a state
state = (1.0 / math.sqrt(2)) * np.array([[1, 0, 0, 1]])
wf_bell = my_wf.compute_wf(state)

# Plot the Wigner function (under construction)
my_wf.plot(state)
```

### Advanced functionality
MUB operators can be viewed as living on rays in discrete phase space. Thus, one can provide a set 
of such rays to the constructor, as a list of objects of type curves.  You must provide a legitimate set of
d + 1 curves to do this - tread carefully.
If no set of rays is provided, the MUBs will be built from the set
of Desarguesian curves (linear curves). See the section on Curves below.
```
f = GaloisField(2, 2, [1, 1, 1])
rays = [Curve([0, el], f) for el in f]
rays.append(Curve([0, el], f, True))
some_mubs = MUBs(gf, rays)
```
=============================================

### Future features
- Explicit matrix forms of all operators using numpy
- Computation of mutually unbiased vectors from the operator table 
- Implementation of unitary transformations of the MUB table and associated curves
- Computation and transformations of associated Latin squares
- Coarse graining for incomplete tomography (research in progress!) 
- Wigner functions, point operators, and plotting

Commit message:

Installed cairocffi and libffi in order to get matplotlib plotting functions to work on Ubuntu with python 3. Wigner function plotting functions are now working successfully

README.md, after:

# Balthasar
A Python package for generating and manipulating mutually unbiased bases. Balthasar is currently under development and is as a result may not be fully functional. If you find any bugs, don't hesitate to contact me at odimatte@uwaterloo.ca.

## Dependencies

- [PyniteFields](https://github.com/glassnotes/PyniteFields)
- numpy
- libffi, cairocffi (for plotting Wigner functions with matplotlib)

===================================================

## Installation
In the main directory of the program, you can install Balthasar into your version of Python 3 using the following command:

```
python3 setup.py install
```

## Usage

### MUBs

To generate a set of MUBs in dimension _p_<sup>_n_</sup>, you must simply provide a finite field in this dimension:
```
from pynitefields import *
from balthasar import *

f = GaloisField(2, 3, [1, 1, 0, 1])  # Finite field of order 8
f.to_sdb([3, 5, 6]) dim8_mubs = MUBs(f)
```

It is best to use a self-dual, or almost self-dual basis to construct your MUB table. Using the
polynomial basis is not inherently a problem, but the program will produce a warning if you do so.


The created table of MUB operators can be viewed using
```
dim8_mubs.print()
```


### Curves
Balthasar contains a separate class Curve for manipulating curves over the finite field. 
A curve _b_(_a_) = _c_<sub>0</sub> + _c_<sub>1</sub> _a_ + ... + _c_<sub>_k_</sub> _a_<sup>k</sup>
where the _c_<sub>i</sub> are elements of the finite field is turned into a Curve object using a list
of the form [_c_<sub>0</sub>, _c_<sub>1</sub>, ..., _c_<sub>_k_</sub>] as in the following example:
```
f = GaloisField(2, 2, [1, 1, 1])
c = Curve([0, f[1], f[3], f[2]], f)
c.print() # Will print the curve in polynomial form
c.print(True) # Will print the points in the curve as tuples (repr as powers of the primitive element)
```
It is necessary to specify the field because we can have curves which simply contain constant coefficients:
```
f = GaloisField(5)
c = Curve([0, 1, 3], f) # [0, 1, 3] could be a curve in many different fields
```

### Striations
Striations are the partitions of the affine plane into groups of parallel lines. They are used to
build Latin squares and MUBs, and also to compute the point operators in discrete phase space for
the Wigner function. The set of striations can be generated using the code snippet below; the first
element of the striation list is the rays, or the lines which pass through the origin.
```
f = GaloisField(2, 2, [1, 1, 1])
s = Striations(f)
s[0] # Rays
```

### Latin squares

To generate a Latin square, one must simply pass it a curve over some finite field.
```
f = GaloisField(7)
c = Curve([0, f[1]], f)
l = LatinSquare(c)
l.print() # Prints the Latin square of order 7
```

### Wigner functions

One of the main purpose for writing Balthasar was to compute the Wigner functions in discrete phases space. 
A Wigner function can be generated using a table of MUBs expressed in the self-dual basis. A Wigner function
can be computed from either a state vector or a density matrix.
```
f = GaloisField(2, 2, [1, 1, 1])
f.to_sdb([1, 2])

dim4_mubs = MUBs(f)

my_wf = WignerFunction(dim4_mubs)

# Compute the wf of a state
state = (1.0 / math.sqrt(2)) * np.array([[1, 0, 0, 1]])
wf_bell = my_wf.compute_wf(state)

# Plot the Wigner function
my_wf.plot(state)
```

### Advanced functionality
MUB operators can be viewed as living on rays in discrete phase space. Thus, one can provide a set 
of such rays to the constructor, as a list of objects of type curves.  You must provide a legitimate set of
d + 1 curves to do this - tread carefully.
If no set of rays is provided, the MUBs will be built from the set
of Desarguesian curves (linear curves). See the section on Curves below.
```
f = GaloisField(2, 2, [1, 1, 1])
rays = [Curve([0, el], f) for el in f]
rays.append(Curve([0, el], f, True))
some_mubs = MUBs(gf, rays)
```
=============================================

### Future features
- Explicit matrix forms of all operators using numpy
- Computation of mutually unbiased vectors from the operator table 
- Implementation of unitary transformations of the MUB table and associated curves
- Computation and transformations of associated Latin squares
- Coarse graining for incomplete tomography (research in progress!) 
- Wigner functions, point operators, and plotting
