doc/intro.rst, before:

Introduction to Balthasar
****************************

Balthasar is a set of Python tools I've written to handle objects
relevant to my research in (incomplete) quantum tomography. In particular, 
I work frequently with:

* Mutually unbiased bases and their associated operator tables
* Lines and curves in discrete phase space
* Affine planes and Latin squares and their interplay with curves in phase space
* Discrete Wigner functions (computation and plotting)

The idea was to enable anyone interested to quickly generate and transform 
tables of MUB operators. In particular, Balthasar was developed with the
automation of coarse-grained discrete Wigner functions in mind (see our recent 
arXiv preprint (cite it)). 

Balthasar also relies on the package PyniteFields, which handles all the 
underlying finite field arithmetic.

Currently all development is being done (sometimes poorly) by me, Olivia Di
Matteo, a PhD student at the University of Waterloo / Institute for Quantum
Computing. Most of the background work is being done in collaboration with 
researchers in the Leuchs Division at Max Planck Institute for the Science of Light.

If you find any bugs, or want to help, shoot me an e-mail at odimatte -at- 
uwaterloo.ca.

Commit message:

Updated documentation; added headers to all source files. Ready to go.

doc/intro.rst, after:

Introduction to Balthasar
****************************

Balthasar is a set of Python tools I've written to handle objects
relevant to my research in quantum tomography. In particular, 
I work frequently with:

* Mutually unbiased bases and their associated operator tables
* Lines and curves in discrete phase space
* Affine planes and Latin squares and their interplay with curves in phase space
* Discrete Wigner functions (computation and plotting)

The idea was to enable anyone interested to quickly generate and transform 
tables of MUB operators. In particular, Balthasar was developed with the eventual
automation of coarse-grained discrete Wigner functions in mind (paper in preparation).

Balthasar also relies on my package PyniteFields_, which handles all the 
underlying finite field arithmetic.

.. _PyniteFields: https://github.com/glassnotes/PyniteFields 

Currently all development is being done (sometimes poorly) by me, Olivia Di
Matteo, a PhD student at the University of Waterloo / Institute for Quantum
Computing. Some of the research is being done in collaboration with 
researchers at the Max Planck Institute for the Science of Light.

Balthasar is licensed under the BSD-3 Clause. 

Please note that Balthasar is a work in progress, as is this documentation.
Things may be incomplete, hastily or unclearly explained, or broken. If you 
find any bugs, or want to help, shoot me an e-mail at odimatte@uwaterloo.ca.
